# First stab at Angular

## Points to get started

* Angular is a single page application (SPA) web framework, including:
  * a browser-based runtime
  * Dev-time toolchain: Typescript compiler, bundlers, dependency management
  * Source is structured in a componenting system; component-oriented architecture
* AngularJS was a first iteration, superceded by Angular later - total rewrite, with no meaningful migration path
* Angular is written and built/compiled:
  * Text is in TypeScript, which compiles into Javascript
  * ES6 (Ecmascript 6)
  * Javascript is bundled into web-shippable JS files with Webpack (a _bundler_)
* Dev-time functionality is provided by nodejs:
  * Package & dependency management with npm tooling


## Javascript getting started bits

* `var` declarations in JS are "hoisted" - ie. deemed to have been at the top of their scope (global scope or function scope; not control-flow blocks (`if`, `for`, `while`, ...)).
* `let` is an ES6 solution to `var` weirdness
  * No hoisting
  * Declarable in all blocks, they get block scope
  * Names are re-useable in an inner scope
  * If you `let` a variable in a block that is also `let` in an outer block, but use it in the block before it's letted, you get a "used before inited" failure; ie. if you're going to reuse a name in a block, the outer-scope version is not available in that block:

```js
let a = 6

if (true) {
  console.log("inside: " + a); // Boom!
  let a = 10;
}
```
* const is an ES6 thing; works as you'd expect.

### Function parameters
* No overriding:
  * If you call a JS function with fewer parms than in the signature, the remainder get undefined.
  * More parms, the overflow gets ignored.  
  * Replace a function with a new one, it just replaces.
  * All args are available in an `arguments` magic var, which is a dict of `{'0': "arg1 val", '1': "arg2 val"}`
  * Can specify unspecified args with `...argname` as the last parm - gives an iterable object
* String interpolation: String constant uses \` instead of ", and then use JS values with ${someVar}
* Dict initialisation shorthand for js objects in ES6 - doing `{Key1, Key2}` uses `Key1` and `Key2`'s values and names to initialised the dict; ie. `{Key1: Key1, Key2: Key2}`
* Spread operator does an unpack: 

```javascript
function three(a, b, c) {
  console.log(`${a} ${b} ${c}`);
}

> three(...a)
1 2 3
```

  * Used to clone arrays, cuz `a = [1]; b = a` does a refcopy
  * Also works with dicts: `c = {...{a: 1, b: 2}, ...{c: 3, d: 4}}`

### For loops
* For loops.  Given `a = [6, 7, 8, 9];`:
  * `for (let inx = 0; inx < a.length; index ++) { /* stuff */ }` - note array.length
  * `for (let inx in a) { /* stuff with a[inx] */ }` - `a` just takes on vals of the index; for dict-type objects it gives you keys, for arrays it gives you inxes
  * `for (let vals of a) { /* stuff with a */ }` - iterates over an iterable object (so arrays; dict-types aren't iterable). ES6 only


### Object properties
* It's bonkers and very evolved.
* Props can be "own" (ie. not "inherited" (from __proto__)), enumerable or string/symbol.
  * the "in" operator works for all properties regardless
  * `for (let a in|of b)` only gives you enumerable (both own & inherited)
  * `obj.hasOwnProperty` and `obj.propertyIsEnumerable` give info

### JS inheritance - Prototype inheritance vs. class-based inheritance
* ES6 classes are just syntactical sugar over traditional JS prototyping
* All objects have a `__proto__` member, which is another object.
* When referencing an object property, it checks:
  * The object
  * `obj.__proto__`
  * `obj.__proto__.__proto__`
  * ... until the parent `__proto__` is null.
* Objects can have function properties. Call a function via the object sets the `this` pointer.
* A function can be a constructor: a standalone function which sets values on a `this` pointer. Calling such a function with the `new` operator:
  * Creates a new object,
  * Sets its `__proto__` to the `prototype` property of the constructor
  * *Note:* all functions have a `prototype` property set to `{constructor: func}` by default; so, all functions are implicitly constructors even though they're not necessarily used that way.
  * The `prototype.constructor` property above is inited to the function reference
* Can set methods by setting attribs on the prototype to function pointers

 ```javascript
 function Thingy() {}
 Thingy.prototype.getColour = () => {return this.colour;}
 Thingy.prototype.colour = "blue"

 a = new Thingy(); // Create empty object; set __proto__ to Thingy.prototype
 a.getColour(); // returns "blue" cuz a.__proto__ == Thingy.prototype
 a.colour = "red";
 a.getColour(); // returns "red"
 delete a.colour;
 a.getColour(); // "blue"
 ```
 Identical to:
 
 ```javascript
 class Thingy {
  constructor() {}
  getColour() {return this.colour;} // no function keyword in classes!!
 }
 Thingy.prototype.colour = "blue" // Rather set this in the constructor, though
 // ...
 ```
 ...all the way down to `typeof(Thingy) == function`

### Classes
* Classes are new in ES6. Prior, had the old JS class prototype weirdness.
* Class instances have dynamic attribs: 

```js
class Dog {
  Save() { 
    console.log("Dog saved: " + this.name + 
      "( colour: " + this.colour + ")");
  }
}

milly = new Dog();
milly.name = "Milly";
milly.colour = "Brown and white";

milly.Save();
```
* Note creation w/ `new`
* constructors declared with `constructor` keyword: 

```js
class Dog {
  constructor(name, colour) {
    this.name = name;
    this.colour = colour;
  }
}
```
* Constructors are inherited if not redeclared in the subclass (duh cuz they're on the prototype)
* functions declared in the class are created as properties of the `MyClass.prototype`
* If the subclass implements a constructor, have to call superclass constructor w/ `super(...)` before referencing `this` or returning

### Anonymous functions

```javascript
function () {...} // this is bound at function invocation time
() => {...} // this is bound at function creation time
() => 10; // no braces if it's just an expression; python: a = lambda : 10
```

### This binding

On function invocation, a new Local Execution Context is created w/ bunches of info, include the inited `this` value; determined based on these rules:
* *Default binding:* Called from top-level context (outside of an object call); `this` is set to the global context, and has access to all globals. In strict mode, it's `undefined`
* *Implicit binding:* Called in context of object - `myobj.foo()`.  This works no matter how the function is added as a property to the obj - at declaration time in a class, or later via assigning an anonymous function. `this` is calculated at invocation time.
* *Explicit binding:* Set explicitly. For `function foo() {console.log(this);}`, do `foo.call(obj)` Can also use:
  * `foo.apply([obj])` - like `call`, but args in an array
  * `foo.bind(obj)` - creates a closure with some parms already set, including the `this` from the first arg.
* *new binding:* When calling a constructor. Creates a new obj and passes it as `this`; `prototype` from func set as `__proto__` on the new object.
* *=> :* arrow funcs create a closure with `this` fixed as the `this` of the scope where the function was created.

### Async & Promises

Javascript is single threaded & event driven. When you set timers, make external async calls, etc. they get added as events to the JS event queue by the runtime (which can do whatever it likes); all the events will be handled sequentially, though.

For node.js, when the runtime starts up it processes the provided script and then starts the event loop. Thus, the script is all about setting up the timers, intervals, listening sockets, etc., and the event loop will then take over.

* `setTimeout(func, delay)` - calls functions asynchronously; delay can be 0. 

A `Promise` is a way to run JS code in an async manner. You create the promise object passing in a method to call. The method takes two parms: 
1. A callback for success, which takes the return value
1. A callback for failure, which takes an error thing - string, whatever.

The code to be run will be immediately scheduled; ie. it could run the moment the event loop gets back control. However, the calls to the callbacks are caught and stored, and will only be passed on when `then()` or `catch()` are called on the `Promise`.
* `then` passes in a success and fail callback, which will be called with the result. They're both optional, so you can just provide one or the other.
* `catch` passes in only a fail callback.

Each call to `then` or `catch` passes back a new `Promise`, so you can chain them together. When the system needs to call a callback, it traverses down the chain and calls the first callback it finds.

Given the above, the usage pattern for this is to chain with `then`, providing the next function in the chain to be called on the success value. The last call in the chain is the call to `catch` which can catch anything that blows up in  the whole chain. You can log and suppress errors by putting a `catch` call where you want to stop the error.

#### A bit more detail

Promises are a commitment to run some code and either produce or fail to produce a value from them. You interact with a promise by calling its "then" to give it channels to communicate values.

You call "then" with handler functions. They will be wrapped in a Promise, which is returned from `then()`. The new promise represents the commitment to call the handlers you've provided. 

The when you create a promise, the code you give to the promise will be called synchronously in the same event tick. The handlers provided to the `then()` will be called async when the promise resolves.

A Promise is resolved when it has run its code, and has either a rejection or a value back. It can still be "pending" even if it's resolved, because it has to stay "pending" if the downstream promise is still pending - it can only be fulfilled once all promises in the chain are fulfilled.

```javascript
doStuff() // Creates a Promise
  .then(nextStep) // Optional error handler not provided
  .then(oneAfter) // Each then() returns a new Promise
  .then(andSoOn)
   // Final catch - will catch a fail in any of the above.
   // catch() only provides the fail handler, not success
  .catch(whoops);
```

#### Python style async: `async` & `await`

Declaring a function `async` is just syntactical sugar that wraps the call in a promise and gives you that back.

`Await` on a promise (ie. an `async` function) gives you back the resolved-to value or throws an exception on error.

### Modules

#### Modules in ES5 (CommonJS):
  * js files are implicitly modules, and all members are private
  * Publish members with `exports.myFunction = getString` - creates an alias. Need to publish after declaration.
  * Import modules with `let myLib = require('./lib1');` -> exported members available on myLib.*
  * Can replace whole namespace by assigning to `module.exports`: `module.exports = Square` 
    * Square is a class defined in the module
    * Then, in the import, 

```js
  const Square = require('./square.js');
  mySquare = new Square(2);
```

There are (officially) some rules to enable node to identify CommonJS imports (for example, we need the nearest `package.json` file to have `type="commonjs"`). In practise, assuming we've made `commonJS` available, node does the right thing.

CommonJS wraps the module as follows as its loaded, which is what gives it its encapsulation. It also means there are some globals available (the args list below):

```js
(function(exports, require, module, __filename, __dirname) {
    // your code lives here
});
```

#### In browsers
* \<script\> tags were used originally, which made everything in all files global; later functions override earlier w/ same name

##### IIFE (Immediately Invoked Function Expressions) 
  * A function that runs as soon as it's implemented: `(function () {/* Code goes here. */ } )()`
  * Can put initialisation code in it without polluting global namespace
  * Can return a dict of names -> closures, which have functionality and data in them; kinda like a class

The following is an IIFE example. 
* makeWithdraw is a fat-arrow single-expression function which contains one IIFE. 
* That IIFE declares a local of `balance` which is initialised to the `copyBalance` parameter. 
* The IIFE hides the `doBadThings` internal function.
* The IIFE returns a dict which uses parameter destructuring to achieve `{withdraw: <function>}`, so that the user can call the function on the dict as if it's a standard class. Because this is a closure, the balance is stored as state on the closure.

```js
const makeWithdraw = 
    (balance) => (
      (copyBalance) => {

        let balance = copyBalance; // This variable is private

        const doBadThings = () => {
          console.log("I will do bad things with your money");
        };

        doBadThings();

        return {
            withdraw(amount) {
                if (balance >= amount) {
                    balance -= amount;
                    return balance;
                }
                return "Insufficient money";
            },
            withdrawb(amount) {
                if (balance >= amount) {
                    balance -= amount;
                    return balance;
                }
                return "Insufficient money";                
            }
        };

      } 
    ) (balance);

exports.makeWithdraw=makeWithdraw
```

Note that unlike python, where the closure data is stored per-closure, JS stores the state of the variables in the enclosing scope and so you could have other methods also modifying the `balance` as a shared value.

##### AMD (async module definition) is the de facto

Uses a lib called `RequireJS` to load modules; this lib provides functions called `define` and `require`. 

The `define` function takes three parameters:
* An ID  - optional, ignorable. Generally you don't specify this and the ID is taken from the filename.
* An array of strings indicating dependencies - specified using the modules' identifiers.
* A callback function that takes the same number of args as you specified dependencies. RequireJS will load all dependencies and pass them to this function when it loads it. 
`Define` will run the code in your callback. Your callback should return an object (which is the module!) to RequireJS. The attributes of the returned object is the interface to your module.

The `require` function takes similar parameters to `define`. You use `require` in your `main.js` to load all dependencies; the main code you want to run should run inside the callback written in the call to `require`.

`RequireJS` specifies a config file format where you can specify indirection to load dependecies from different locations. `RequireJS` also has a "concatenator" that lets you build a single-file package of all of your deps.

To load, the `<script>` tag specifies the script as RequireJS:

```html
<script src="js/lib/require.js" data-main="js/config"></script>
```

The specified config script uses `require.config`, and provides paths to files, dependencies and data on how to load non-RequireJS modules. RequireJS loads this and then runs the `require` calls.
    
##### ES6 Loading

* Publish functions from a script with `export myFunction() {}`
* Import with `import {myFunction} from "./mylib.js"`

* ES6 modules can only be imported from other modules, not from regular scripts; you make something a module by naming it with an `.mjs` extension.
* JS strict is on by default in modules.
* Paths in import statements have to be explicit - start with `./` or `/`

* Rename items on import with `import {myFunction as newName} from "./mylib.js"`
* Ditto on export: `export {myFunction as newName}`
* Import all exports with `import * as One from "./js/one.js"`
* Can export classes, functions, consts and vars (although vars are readonly from the importing module).

* ES is backward compatible with CommonJS modules; ie. you can do `import {bob} from "commonjs_mod.js"`, and ES loading knows how to handle it.
* In an ES module, you have the global `import.meta.url`, which is the URL to the current module's file. `import.meta` is an object with one attribute - `url`.

### Misc stuff

* Array objects have a load of utility things on them, like `filter` (takes a lambda), `map` (ditto), `forEach` (like `map` but void return), ...
* The Object (which is a constructor; ie. a function) has a load of utility stuff for objects on it, like 
  * `Object.keys(obj)` - returns an array of enumerable keys
  * `Object.values(obj)` - as you'd expect
* Destructuring = unpacking:
  * `[a, b, c] = [1, 2, 3]`
  * `{c, a, b} = {a: 1, b: 2, c: 3} // Sorts out the order`
  * `[a1, b1] = [b1, a1] // Swapsies!`
  * `function doStuff(a, b, [c, d, e], f, g) {...}`, then `doStuff(1, 2, my3ElemArr, 11, 12)`

* Lite-server is a nifty little tool to test websites. 
  * It's available through `npm install lite-server`
  * Run it with `./node_modules/lite-server/bin/lite-server`
  * It will serve from the current directory.
  * It also injects some client-side code into every served page that does syncing across multiple browsers - not sure what that's about