# Limits

* Given any point $$p$$ on a curve, you can choose points ever closer to it (on the left and the right) such that they approach $$p$$; they're at an *infinitesimal distance* from $$p$$
* The limit of the function $$f$$ at $$p$$ is the value of $$f$$ at $$p$$; as you approach $$p$$, this value is the limit
* For a function $$f$$, $$\lim\limits_{x \to a} f(x) = L$$
    * Values of $$f(x)$$ can be made arbitrarily close to $$L$$ by requiring that $$x$$ be sufficiently close to, but not equal to, $$a$$
* For simple examples, it's easy. For $$f(x) = 2x + 3$$, the limit as $$x$$ approaches $$3$$ is $$9$$.
* For others, it's harder. for $$f(x) = { {x^2}\over{1 - x}}$$, there is no value of $$y$$ for this function when $$x = 1$$. 
    * As $$x$$ tends towards $$1$$ from the left, the value of the function tends towards positive infinity; as the denominator gets smaller and smaller, and the numerator gets closer and closer to $$1$$, the ratio between them becomes infinitely large. 
    * Similarly, as $$x$$ approaches one from the right, the denominator tends closer towards an infinitely small *negative* number (because $$x > 1$$), and so the result of the function tends towards negative infinity.
* So, for the first example we say that $$f(x)$$ was a 2-sided limit: as you approach the value from left or right, the value of the function tends towards the same value. 
    * The second example has both left hand and right hand limits, and they're different: ; ie. as you approach from these directions, they tend towards a different number.
    * Right hand limit: $$\lim\limits_{x \to a^+} f(x) = L$$ - ie. we can make $$f(x)$$ as close to $$L$$ as we like by choosing  $$x\to{a}$$ but greater than $$a$$. 
    * Left hand limit: $$\lim\limits_{x \to a^-} f(x) = L$$ - ie. we can make $$f(x)$$ as close to $$L$$ as we like by choosing $$x\to{a}$$ but less than $$a$$.
* You only get a two-sided limit if both limits exist, and are equal.
* If the limit from either side is different, then the limit itself does not exist.
* In python, you can use `SymPy.limit()` to calculate limits.

https://www.khanacademy.org/math/calculus-1/cs1-limits-and-continuity/cs1-formal-definition-of-limits-epsilon-delta/v/building-the-idea-of-epsilon-delta-definition

## Epsilon-Delta

If the limit of $$f(x)$$ as $$x \to a$$ is $$L$$, then what we're saying is that if the distance between $$x$$ and $$a$$ is non-zero but smaller than some value, then the distance between $$f(x)$$ and $$L$$ will also be non-zero and smaller than some other value determined by $$f(a)$$.

If the first distance ($$x$$ to $$a$$) is $$\delta$$, and the second ($$f(x)$$ to $$L$$) is $$\epsilon$$, then the formal definition of a limit is:

For all $$\delta > 0$$ there exists an $$\epsilon > 0$$ such that

if 
$$|x - a| < \delta$$, then $$|f(x) - L| < \epsilon $$.

## Proof of a formal limit

The crux of this proof is that if we can define $$\delta$$ in terms of $$\epsilon$$ such that you can calculate $$\delta$$ for all possible values of $$\epsilon$$, then job jobbed.

so, if we're looking at $$f(x) = 5x + 2$$, and we want to prove that $$\lim\limits_{x \to 3} f(x) = 17$$, or 

$$|x - 3| < \delta \Longleftrightarrow |f(x) - 17| < \epsilon$$

First we rephrase the $$\epsilon$$ inequality so that we can see how $$\epsilon$$ relates to $$\delta$$:

$$|f(x) - 17| < \epsilon$$

$$|5x + 2 - 17| < \epsilon$$

$$|5x - 15| < \epsilon$$

$$5|x - 3| < \epsilon$$

$$|x - 3| < { \epsilon \over 5} $$

We use that value as our value for $$\delta$$.  So, the proof:

* $$\epsilon > 0$$ is given.  
* We choose $$\delta = {\epsilon \over 5}$$
* Assume the first part of our limit is correct: 
$$|x - 3| < \delta$$
* Now:
$$|f(x) - 17| < \epsilon$$

$$|5x + 2 - 17| < \epsilon$$

$$|5x - 15| < \epsilon$$

$$5|x - 3| < \epsilon$$

If 
$$|x - 3| < \delta$$ (our assumption above), then 

$$5|x - 3| < 5 \cdot { \epsilon \over 5 }$$

$$5|x - 3| < \epsilon $$ 

Which, if you look at our manipulations of $$\epsilon$$ above, is the same as

$$|f(x) - 17| < \epsilon$$

...which is what we trying to prove. So, if you want $$f(x)$$ to be within $$\epsilon$$ of $$L$$, select values of $$x$$ within $${\epsilon \over 5}$$ of $$a$$.

## Properties of limits
For the below,

$$\lim\limits_{x \to a} f(x) = L$$

and 

$$\lim\limits_{x \to a} g(x) = M$$

### Sum and Difference rules

$$\lim\limits_{x \to a} ( f(x) + g(x) )$$

$$= \lim\limits_{x \to a} f(x) + \lim\limits_{x \to a} g(x) $$

$$= L + M$$


Similarly:

$$\lim\limits_{x \to a} ( f(x) - g(x) )$$

$$= \lim\limits_{x \to a} f(x) - \lim\limits_{x \to a} g(x) $$

$$= L - M$$

### Product and quotient rules

$$\lim\limits_{x \to a} ( f(x) \cdot g(x) )$$

$$= \lim\limits_{x \to a} f(x) \cdot \lim\limits_{x \to a} g(x) $$

$$= L \cdot M$$


Similarly:

$$\lim\limits_{x \to a} ( { f(x) \over g(x)} )$$

$$= \lim\limits_{x \to a} f(x) / \lim\limits_{x \to a} g(x) $$

$$= {L \over M}$$

### Exponent rule

$$\lim\limits_{x \to a} ( f(x)^{r \over s} )$$

$$=  \big({\lim\limits_{x \to a} f(x)}\big)^{r \over s} $$

$$= L^{r \over s}$$

## Limits of composite functions

$$\lim\limits_{x \to a} f\big( g(x) \big)$$

Firstly, this is the same as 

$$f\big( \lim\limits_{x \to a} g(x) \big)$$

If:
1. $$\exists \lim\limits_{x \to a} g(x)$$ (which we call $$L$$), AND
2. $$f(x)$$ is continuous at $$L$$.

Intuitively, if $$x \to a$$, then $$g(x) \to g(a)$$, and so $$ f(g(x)) $$ is approaching $$f(g(a))$$ - so if that value can be approached (ie. the limit exists), and $$f(x)$$ has a value at that point, then the theorem holds true.

There's a wrinkle where if we're approaching $$a$$ from the left, then the value passing in to $$f(x)$$ isn't necessarily approaching from the left - it depends on the output of $$g(x)$$.  If $$g(x)$$ _decreases_ as $$x \to a$$, then $$f(x)$$ could be approaching $$a$$ from the right.