# Calculus notes

## Intro

Calculus: study the rate of change of quantities

* Differential: "derivative equation" describes the rate of change of a function
  * Find min or max value of a given function as part of an optimisation function
  * Uses "differentiation" to find the derivative of a function
    * Process of dividing something into smaller parts to track changes
  * Derivatives used to determine the instantaneous rate of change of a function
  * Is a function increasing or decreasing?

* Integral calculus is all about finding the area under a curve
  * Using integrals
  * Uses "integration" to find the *integral* = reverse process of differentiation
      * Sum up tiny pieces to get the total area
  * Find areas, volumes & central points

## Machine learning applications

* Use arrays to represent dataset & models
* Use derivatives for decision making, optimisation, ...
* Gradient descent algo too
    * Eg. model error function

## Single variable calculus

* Functions that take a single input -> output (ie. $f(x) = 
y$)
* Function = rule that connects sets:
    * A function is a relation from a set of inputs to a set of possible outputs, where each input is related to exactly one output
  
* Linear functions
    * f(x) = mx + b => linear function
    * Input val + output val = coordinate pair
    * The function has variables and an input value
    * The m-value in the linear function is the gradient; b is the y intercept (cuz with x == 0, m has no effect)
        * If m > 1, gradient is positive
    * Gradient is constant for all points on the line
    * Given two points on a line, $T_1(x_1,y_1),T_2(x_2,y_2)$:
        * $m = { {y_2 - y_1} \over {x_2 - x_1}}$ - that is, for every 1 unit change in X, how many changed in y? 
        * You can then calculate $b$ by putting in the calculated $m$ and one point ($T_1$ or $T_2$)
        
* Nonlinear functions
    * Has a variable gradient; every point can have a different one (ie. if you draw a line expressing the rate of change at any given point, it will be different to other points)
    
# Intro to derivatives

## Alternative notation for $f'(x)$

* Lagrainge's notation
  * For $f(x) = x + 2$, derivatives are $f'(x) = ...$, $f'''(x)$, $f^{(4)}(x)$
  * For $y = x + 2$, derivatives are $y'$, ...

* Leibniz is the original. Very common for $ y = x + 2 $, etc.
  * ${ {dy} \over {dx}} = [ x + 2 ]$, ${ {d^2y} \over {dx^2}} = [...], ...$
  * Also sometimes just $d \over {dx}$, $d^2 \over dx^2$, ...
  
* Euler's notation
  * $D_xf(x) = x + 2$
  * $D_x^2f(x) = 1$
  * $D_x^3f(x) = 0$
  
* Newton's notation / dot notation; never used.
  * for $f(x)$, derivatives are $\dot{v}$, $\ddot{v}$, ...


## Derivative function - $f'(x)$
Given a non-linear function, you get a curve. The gradient of the curve at any given point is the gradient of the tangent to the curve at that point. This is the derivative; the slope of the line, or the instantanous rate of change.

So, for any function $f(x)$, the derivative of the function at point $x = a$ is denoted as $f'(a)$ ("f-prime of $a$"). This function is: 
$$f'(a) = \lim\limits_{h \to 0 } { {f(a+h) - f(a)}\over{h}}$$

Intuitively: $f(a+h) - f(a)$ is the change in $y$; $h$ is the change in $x$ over the same distance. Assuming $h$ is small enough, you'll get a reasonable approximation of $f'(x)$.

Applying this to a quadratic equation of $f(x) = x^2 + 1$ where $x = 2$, you get:

$$\lim\limits_{h\to 0} { {(2+h)^2 + 1 - 2^2 + 1} \over {h} }$$

$$= \lim\limits_{h\to 0} { {4 + 4h + h^2 + 1 - 5} \over {h} }$$

$$= \lim\limits_{h\to 0} { 4 + h }$$

...and as $h \to 0$, that gives a result of $4$.

Practise problems are here: https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/problems/calci/diffformulas.aspx

## Higher-order derivatives

$f(x)$ tells us the value for $y$ of each $x$ - the position.

$f'(x)$ tells us the instantaneous rate of change of $f(x)$ for any $x$ - ie. the velocity.

$f''(x)$ tells us the rate of change of the rate of change - ie. how has the gradient changed at that $x$? ie. the acceleration

$f'''(x)$ tells us how the acceleration is changing at $x$ - "whoa, we're accelerating faster!"; like a jerk.

Up to here: https://www.linkedin.com/learning/machine-learning-foundations-calculus/the-derivative-of-a-constant-and-the-power-rule?autoSkip=true&autoplay=true&resume=false&u=2094508

# 7 Basic rules for calculating rules.

## Derivative of a constant 
The derivative of a constant is always 0; so, for $f(x) = 5$, $f'(x) = 0$.  
Intuitively, if a function has the same $y$ for every value of $x$, then it will have no rate of change between different values of $x$.

Proof:

$f(x) = n$

$f'(x) = \lim\limits_{h \to 0} { {f(x+h) - f(x)} \over { h } }$

$f'(x) = { {1 - 1} \over {h} } = 0 $ ; note that this function has no limit - if $h = 0$, the function is undefined

## The power rule

The power rule says that 
$$f'(x^n) = nx^{n-1}$$

And thus:
$$f'(x^3) = 1.2.3x $$

The proof is achieved by calculating the derivative of $x^n$:

$f'(x) = \lim\limits_{h \to 0} { {f(x+h) - f(x)} \over { h } }$

$f'(x) = \lim\limits_{h \to 0} { {(x+h)^n - x^n} \over { h } }$

Expand the first term a bit:

$f'(x) = \lim\limits_{h \to 0} { {x^n + nx^{n-1}h + h^2(...) + ... - x^n} \over { h } }$

The $x^n$ s cancel, and $h \to 0$:

$f'(x) =  { nx^{n-1} } $

## The sum rule

The derivative of a sum of functions is the sum of their derivatives.

## The difference rule

The derivative of the difference between functions is the difference between their derivatives.

## The constant multiple rule

The derivative of a constant multiplied by a function is the constant multiplied by the derivative of the function.

## The multiplication rule

The derivative of the product of two functions is the first function times the derivative of the second function plus the second function times the derivative of the first:

if $e(x) = f(x)g(x)$, then 

$$e'(x) = g'(x)f(x) + g(x)f'(x)$$

## Quickly getting derivatives of a function

Because of the sum and difference rules, the derivative of any function is the sum of the derivatives of its terms - so you can use the power rule on each term individually, and then just sum them together.

$f(x) = 5x^2 + 2x + 5$

$f'(x) = {df \over dx}(5x^2) + {df \over dx}(2x) + {df \over dx}(5)$

$f'(x) = (2 \cdot 5x^1) + 1 \cdot 2x^0 + 0$

$f'(x) = 10x$ + 2

Notice how for any nth derivative, any term with $x$ to the power of less than $n$ disappears.

So, if you had  $ f(x) = ax^3 + bx^2 + cx + e $, then to calculate $d^3f \over dx^3$ you can just get rid of the $bx^2 + xc + e$ straight off, because
$ { d^3f \over dx^3 } (bx^2) = 0 \cdot 1 \cdot 2 \cdot bx^{-1}$